A---- 
 
Linear data structure:  Data structure in which data 
elements are arranged sequentially or linearly,  
where each element is attached to its previous and 
next adjacent elements, is called a linear data 
structure.   
 
 
Examples of linear data structures are array, stack, 
queue, linked list, etc.  Static data structure:  Static data structure has a fixed 
memory size.  
 
It is easier to access the elements in a static data 
structure.   
 
An example of this data structure is an array . 
 
Dynamic data structure:  In dynamic data structure, the 
size is not fixed.  
 
It can be randomly updated during the runtime which 
may be considered efficient concerning the memory 
(space) complexity of the code.   
 
 
Examples of this data structure are queue, stack, etc.  
 Non-linear data structure:  Data structures 
where data elements are not placed 
sequentially or linearly are called non -linear 
data structures . 
 
 In a non -linear data structure, we can’t 
traverse all the elements in a single run 
only.  
 
Examples of non -linear data structures are 
trees and graphs.  
 An array is a linear data structure and it is a collection 
of items stored at contiguous memory locations.  
 
The idea is to store multiple items of the same type 
together in one place.  
 
It allows the processing of a large amount of data in a 
relatively short period.  
 
The first element of the array is indexed by a subscript 
of 0.  
 
There are different operations possible in an array, like 
Searching, Sorting, Inserting, Traversing, Reversing, and 
Deleting . 
 
 
 
 Real-Life Applications of Array:  
 
An array is frequently used to store data for mathematical computations.  
It is used in image processing.  
It is also used in record management.  
Book pages are also real -life examples of an array.  
It is used in ordering boxes as well.  Stack is a linear data structure that follows a particular 
order in which the operations are performed.  
 
 
The order is  LIFO(Last in first out) .  
 
Entering and retrieving data is possible from only one 
end.  
 
The entering and retrieving of data is also called push 
and pop operation in a stack.  
 
There are different operations possible in a stack like 
reversing a stack using recursion, Sorting, Deleting the 
middle element of a stack, etc.   
 Queue is a linear data structure that follows a particular order 
in which the operations are performed.  
 
The order is  First In First Out(FIFO)   
  i.e. the data item stored first will be accessed first. In this, 
entering   and retrieving data is not done from only one end.  
 
An example of a queue is any queue of consumers for a 
resource where the consumer that came first is served first . 
 
 Different operations are performed on Queue like Reversing a 
Queue (with or without using recursion ), 
           Reversing the first K elements of a Queue, etc.  
 
Few basic operations performed In Queue are enqueue, 
dequeue, front, rear, etc.  
 Applications of Queue:   
Different applications of Queue are as 
follows:  
Queue is used for handling website traffic.  
It helps to maintain the playlist in media 
players.  
Queue is used in operating systems for 
handling interrupts.  
 A linked list is a linear data structure in which 
elements are not stored at contiguous memory 
locations.  
 
The elements in a linked list are linked using 
pointers as shown in the below image:   
 
Types of linked list:  
Singly -linked list  
Doubly linked list  
Circular linked list  
Doubly circular linked list  
 Linked lists are used to display image 
containers. Users can visit past, current, and 
next images.  
They are used to store the history of the 
visited page.  
They are used to perform undo operations.  
 A tree is a non -linear and hierarchal data structure where the 
elements are arranged in a tree -like structure.  
 
In a tree, the topmost node is called the root node . 
 
 Each node contains some data, and data can be of any type.  
 
It consists of a central node, structural nodes, and sub -nodes 
which are connected via edges.  
 
Different tree data structures allow quicker and easier access 
to the data as it is a non -linear data structure . 
 
 A tree has various terminologies like Node, Root, Edge, 
Height of a tree, Degree of a tree, etc.   
 A graph is a non -linear data structure that consists of 
vertices (or nodes) and edges.  
 
It consists of a finite set of vertices and set of edges 
that connect a pair of nodes.  
 
Graph is used to solve the most challenging and 
complex programming problems.  
 
It has different terminologies which are Path, Degree, 
Adjacent vertices, Connected components, etc.  
 Different applications of Graph are as follows : 
 
Graph is used to represent the flow of 
computation . 
 
It is used in modeling graphs . 
 
The operating system uses Resource Allocation 
Graph . 
 
Also used in the World Wide Web where the web 
pages represent the nodes.  
 Time complexity is defined in terms of how many 
times it takes to run a given algorithm, based on 
the length of the input.  
 
Time complexity is not a measurement of how much 
time it takes to execute a particular algorithm 
because such factors as programming language, 
operating system, and processing power are also 
considered.  
 Time complexity is a type of computational 
complexity that describes the time required to 
execute an algorithm.  
 
The time complexity of an algorithm is the 
amount of time it takes for each statement to 
complete.  
 
As a result, it is highly dependent on the size of 
the processed data .  
 
It also aids in defining an algorithm's 
effectiveness and evaluating its performance.  
 When an algorithm is run on a computer, it 
necessitates a certain amount of memory 
space . 
 
 The amount of memory used by a program 
to execute it is represented by its space 
complexity.  
 
Because a program requires memory to store 
input data and temporal values while 
running, the space complexity is auxiliary 
and input space  1) Traversing:  Every data structure contains the 
set of data elements.  
 
the data structure means visiting each element 
of the data structure in order to perform some 
specific operation like searching or sorting . 
 
Example:  If we need to calculate the average of 
the marks obtained by a student in 6 different 
subject,  
  we need to traverse the complete array of marks 
and calculate the total sum, then we will devide  
that sum by the number of subjects i.e. 6,  
  in order to find the average.  
 2) Insertion:  Insertion can be defined as the 
process of adding the elements to the data 
structure at any location . 
 
If the size of data structure is  n then we can 
only insert  n-1 data elements into it . 
 3) Deletion: The process of removing an 
element from the data structure is called 
Deletion.  
 
 We can delete an element from the data 
structure at any random location.  
 
If we try to delete an element from an 
empty data structure then  underflow  occurs.  
 4) Searching:   
 
The process of finding the location of an 
element within the data structure is called 
Searching.  
 
There are two algorithms to perform 
searching, Linear Search and Binary Search.  
 5) Sorting:   
 
The process of arranging the data structure in 
a specific order is known as Sorting.  
 
There are many algorithms that can be used to 
perform sorting, for example, insertion sort, 
selection sort, bubble sort, etc.  
 6) Merging:   
 
When two lists List A and List B of size M and 
N respectively, of similar type of elements, 
clubbed or joined to produce the third list, 
List C of size (M+N), then this process is 
called merging  